README.md, before:

[![Build Status](https://github.com/BIOP/lightsheet-brain-workflows/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/BIOP/lightsheet-brain-workflows/actions/workflows/build.yml)

# Lightsheet Brain Workflows 🔬🧠

Code to format and preprocess whole-brain cleared brain images acquired with light-sheet fluoresence microscopy. 
Check out the [BIOP's wiki](https://wiki-biop.epfl.ch/en/whole-brain) for protocols about clearing and image acquisition and related information.

This repository allows you to process lighsheet data from .czi files through [BigStitcher](https://imagej.net/plugins/bigstitcher/) and BrainGlobe's brainreg.

# About
The goal of this repository is to build tools to allow for the scalable stitching, fusion and processing of tiled lightsheet data using existing tools.
In addition whole-brain fused image stacks are registered to a reference atlas for downstream analyses.

# Local usage

## Installation

### Fiji 

1. Download a fresh Fiji from fiji.sc 
2. Start Fiji and go to `Help > Update...`
3. Click on "Manage update sites"
4. Add the `PTBIOP` update site
4. Click on `Apply and Close`, then `Apply`, then close and restart Fiji

To use the fast CZI reader, add the following update site: `Zeiss Quick Start Reader`

### BrainReg

Please check the instructions in
 [our Mamba Conda installation page ](https://wiki-biop.epfl.ch/en/ipa/mamba) regarding the BrainReg environment.

## Use 

### Prepare for processing
1. Look for and run `LBW - Open YML Template` in Fiji's search bar, a text editor with the template file will open 
2. replacing user-specific fields and parameters e.g. `save_dir`, `conda_activate_path`, etc.
3. Save this file and make sure it has `.yml` extension, for instance `parameters_john.yml`, 
4. Look for and run `LBW - Create YML Settings From Base File` in Fiji's search bar
3. You will be prompted for an input .yml file, select your `parameters_<user>.yml` file
4. On the GUI, fill in the necessary fields as necessary
	- Under General: Specify your user name and the directory where you would like your processing data to be saved
	- BigStitcher tab: These are the parameters for stitching and fusing the lightsheet data
	**Tip**: for debugging/first try, it is useful to downsample the fused images 8x to quickly check the results.
	- Brainreg tab: For local usage, specify your conda environment name that you installed using the instructions above. The conda location can be found with `where conda`.
	**Tip**: 
		- For optimal registration parameters, leave the default ones. From experience, `grid-spacing` and `bending-energy-weight` seem to matter more.
		- For debugging, it is useful to register your brains to a lower resolution atlas e.g. 25um, 50um. If all works, then register to higher resolution.
5. Run tab: Select one or more folders containing CZI files for processing (you can also drag on drop folders)
6. Click on Save. This will generate one folder per brain .czi file, each containing a ZYXXX_configuration.yml file where ZYXXX is the mouse identifier.
7. Double check the content of these configuration .yml files to make sure all the fields are as desired.


### Processing

**Note**: For better memory usage, restrict RAM memory used by Fiji during stitching (less memory hungry), to allow for more RAM during registration (more memory hungry). To do so:
`Edit -> Options -> Memory & Threads... -> Maximum Memory: 40000MB`

#### Single brain
1. Look for and run `LBW - Stitch And Fuse` in Fiji's search bar
2. Select a single .yml brain configuration file in your output directory. 
2. Choose which preprocessing steps to perform. Default to all.
	**Tip**: Useful for troubleshooting/optimizing registration when steps are already performed, select only the steps to repeat.

This will process the entire brain. The log and console windows are useful to check for abnormal preprocessing. 
You can click on the progress bar located at the bottom right of Fiji's window to get some information about the current running processing step.
The Fiji editor will display run errors.

#### Batch processing
1. Look for `LBW - Stitch And Fuse` in Fiji's search bar
2. Press `Batch` instead of `Run`
3. You can now open or Drag and Drop all the yml file you want to process
4. Click ok, then select the steps to perform
5. Each brain will be processed sequentially, there is also a progress bar and the possibility to cancel processing after each brain

### Downstream analyses of preprocessed brains

After atlas registration using `brainreg`, downstream analyses include can be conveniently performed using BrainGlobe's other tool:
1. [Silicon probe track segmentation](https://brainglobe.info/tutorials/segmenting-1d-tracks.html) using `brainglobe-segmentation`
2. [3D cell detection](https://brainglobe.info/tutorials/cellfinder-detection.html]) using `cellfinder` / `brainmapper`
3. etc.

Other applications that do not involve BrainGlobe's tool are of course also possible, starting from the fused image stacks or from the atlas-registered brain.

BrainGlobe is maintained and evolving, regularly check for updates!

# Additional information

#### Brain orientation in the BrainGlobe's image space definition
- The brain orientation must follow the three-letters [BrainGlobe image space definition](https://brainglobe.info/documentation/setting-up/image-definition.html) (see also [here](https://github.com/brainglobe/bg-space)), later used for atlas registration. This is in reference to the origin of the data (first, top left voxel).
- **First** letter: imaging planes are acquired from far to close to the objective with the brain surface facing the detection objective, so the first image will be the bottom of the brain &rarr; _inferior_ (else _superior_)
- **Second** letter: brains are imaged vertically:
  - With olfactory bulb on top &rarr; _anterior_ 
  - Else, with olfactory bulb at the bottom &rarr; _posterior_
- **Third** letter: images are not mirrored, therefore left part of the image is the left hemisphere of the brain &rarr; _left_ (else _right_)

**Notes**: 
	- It is easier to always image your brains in the same orientation to keep processing consistent and simpler.  
	- The Zeiss microscope acquires images in a mirror view. By default, this flips along the y-axis (vertical) the raw tiles before any reorientation is done. 
	Therefore, the raw input orientation in the BrainGlobe space is that of the actual acquisition (facing the brain if positioned as the Zeiss camera).
	For example, the script will convert IAL to ASR (default coronal views). 
	- Double-check that the re-oriented tiff stack is correct, ask yourself e.g. "should I see fluorescent signal in this hemisphere?".
	
	
#### Atlas registration
- Atlas registration is performed on ASR-oriented brains for easier control of registration quality, but could be done in any orientation.
- From experience, a more intact brain (including olfactory bulbs) is essential for good registration.
- Sufficient background fluorescence seems important to make sure all brain contours are included.
- In case of abnormal illumination (e.g. due to blood stains), the registration "collapses" near the brain edges. Reducing the grid-spacing (-20, -30) ensure a constrained registration less prone to underfitting.

Commit message:

Add BigStitcher update site to README
Updated installation instructions to include BigStitcher update site.

README.md, after:

[![Build Status](https://github.com/BIOP/lightsheet-brain-workflows/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/BIOP/lightsheet-brain-workflows/actions/workflows/build.yml)

# Lightsheet Brain Workflows 🔬🧠

Code to format and preprocess whole-brain cleared brain images acquired with light-sheet fluoresence microscopy. 
Check out the [BIOP's wiki](https://wiki-biop.epfl.ch/en/whole-brain) for protocols about clearing and image acquisition and related information.

This repository allows you to process lighsheet data from .czi files through [BigStitcher](https://imagej.net/plugins/bigstitcher/) and BrainGlobe's brainreg.

# About
The goal of this repository is to build tools to allow for the scalable stitching, fusion and processing of tiled lightsheet data using existing tools.
In addition whole-brain fused image stacks are registered to a reference atlas for downstream analyses.

# Local usage

## Installation

### Fiji 

1. Download a fresh Fiji from fiji.sc 
2. Start Fiji and go to `Help > Update...`
3. Click on "Manage update sites"
4. Add the `PTBIOP` update site
5. Add the `BigStitcher` update site
6. Click on `Apply and Close`, then `Apply`, then close and restart Fiji

To use the fast CZI reader, add the following update site: `Zeiss Quick Start Reader`

### BrainReg

Please check the instructions in
 [our Mamba Conda installation page ](https://wiki-biop.epfl.ch/en/ipa/mamba) regarding the BrainReg environment.

## Use 

### Prepare for processing
1. Look for and run `LBW - Open YML Template` in Fiji's search bar, a text editor with the template file will open 
2. replacing user-specific fields and parameters e.g. `save_dir`, `conda_activate_path`, etc.
3. Save this file and make sure it has `.yml` extension, for instance `parameters_john.yml`, 
4. Look for and run `LBW - Create YML Settings From Base File` in Fiji's search bar
3. You will be prompted for an input .yml file, select your `parameters_<user>.yml` file
4. On the GUI, fill in the necessary fields as necessary
	- Under General: Specify your user name and the directory where you would like your processing data to be saved
	- BigStitcher tab: These are the parameters for stitching and fusing the lightsheet data
	**Tip**: for debugging/first try, it is useful to downsample the fused images 8x to quickly check the results.
	- Brainreg tab: For local usage, specify your conda environment name that you installed using the instructions above. The conda location can be found with `where conda`.
	**Tip**: 
		- For optimal registration parameters, leave the default ones. From experience, `grid-spacing` and `bending-energy-weight` seem to matter more.
		- For debugging, it is useful to register your brains to a lower resolution atlas e.g. 25um, 50um. If all works, then register to higher resolution.
5. Run tab: Select one or more folders containing CZI files for processing (you can also drag on drop folders)
6. Click on Save. This will generate one folder per brain .czi file, each containing a ZYXXX_configuration.yml file where ZYXXX is the mouse identifier.
7. Double check the content of these configuration .yml files to make sure all the fields are as desired.


### Processing

**Note**: For better memory usage, restrict RAM memory used by Fiji during stitching (less memory hungry), to allow for more RAM during registration (more memory hungry). To do so:
`Edit -> Options -> Memory & Threads... -> Maximum Memory: 40000MB`

#### Single brain
1. Look for and run `LBW - Stitch And Fuse` in Fiji's search bar
2. Select a single .yml brain configuration file in your output directory. 
2. Choose which preprocessing steps to perform. Default to all.
	**Tip**: Useful for troubleshooting/optimizing registration when steps are already performed, select only the steps to repeat.

This will process the entire brain. The log and console windows are useful to check for abnormal preprocessing. 
You can click on the progress bar located at the bottom right of Fiji's window to get some information about the current running processing step.
The Fiji editor will display run errors.

#### Batch processing
1. Look for `LBW - Stitch And Fuse` in Fiji's search bar
2. Press `Batch` instead of `Run`
3. You can now open or Drag and Drop all the yml file you want to process
4. Click ok, then select the steps to perform
5. Each brain will be processed sequentially, there is also a progress bar and the possibility to cancel processing after each brain

### Downstream analyses of preprocessed brains

After atlas registration using `brainreg`, downstream analyses include can be conveniently performed using BrainGlobe's other tool:
1. [Silicon probe track segmentation](https://brainglobe.info/tutorials/segmenting-1d-tracks.html) using `brainglobe-segmentation`
2. [3D cell detection](https://brainglobe.info/tutorials/cellfinder-detection.html]) using `cellfinder` / `brainmapper`
3. etc.

Other applications that do not involve BrainGlobe's tool are of course also possible, starting from the fused image stacks or from the atlas-registered brain.

BrainGlobe is maintained and evolving, regularly check for updates!

# Additional information

#### Brain orientation in the BrainGlobe's image space definition
- The brain orientation must follow the three-letters [BrainGlobe image space definition](https://brainglobe.info/documentation/setting-up/image-definition.html) (see also [here](https://github.com/brainglobe/bg-space)), later used for atlas registration. This is in reference to the origin of the data (first, top left voxel).
- **First** letter: imaging planes are acquired from far to close to the objective with the brain surface facing the detection objective, so the first image will be the bottom of the brain &rarr; _inferior_ (else _superior_)
- **Second** letter: brains are imaged vertically:
  - With olfactory bulb on top &rarr; _anterior_ 
  - Else, with olfactory bulb at the bottom &rarr; _posterior_
- **Third** letter: images are not mirrored, therefore left part of the image is the left hemisphere of the brain &rarr; _left_ (else _right_)

**Notes**: 
	- It is easier to always image your brains in the same orientation to keep processing consistent and simpler.  
	- The Zeiss microscope acquires images in a mirror view. By default, this flips along the y-axis (vertical) the raw tiles before any reorientation is done. 
	Therefore, the raw input orientation in the BrainGlobe space is that of the actual acquisition (facing the brain if positioned as the Zeiss camera).
	For example, the script will convert IAL to ASR (default coronal views). 
	- Double-check that the re-oriented tiff stack is correct, ask yourself e.g. "should I see fluorescent signal in this hemisphere?".
	
	
#### Atlas registration
- Atlas registration is performed on ASR-oriented brains for easier control of registration quality, but could be done in any orientation.
- From experience, a more intact brain (including olfactory bulbs) is essential for good registration.
- Sufficient background fluorescence seems important to make sure all brain contours are included.
- In case of abnormal illumination (e.g. due to blood stains), the registration "collapses" near the brain edges. Reducing the grid-spacing (-20, -30) ensure a constrained registration less prone to underfitting.
